The Moral Law tells us the tune we have to play: our instincts are merely the keys...
The proper rewards are not simply tacked on to the activity for which they are given, but are the activity itself in consummation.
You and I have need of the strongest spell that can be found to wake us from the evil enchantment of worldliness.
Perfect humility dispenses with modesty.
If God is satisfied with the work, the work may be satisfied with itself.
When humans should have become as perfect in voluntary obedience as the inanimate creation is in its lifeless obedience, then they will put on its glory, or rather that greater glory of which Nature is only the first sketch.
As long as this deliberate refusal to understand things from above, even where such understanding is possible, continues, it is idle to talk of any final victory over materialism.
No Christian and, indeed, no historian could accept the epigram which defines religion as 'what a man does with his solitude.'
We live, in fact, in a world starved for solitude, silence, and private: and therefore starved for meditation and true friendship.
To make Christianity a private affair while banishing all privacy is to relegate it to the rainbow's end or the Greek Calends.
100 per cent of us die, and the percentage cannot be increased.
When you invite a middle-aged moralist to address you, I suppose I must conclude...that you have a taste for middle-aged moralizing.
Whenever you find a man who says he doesn't believe in a real Right and Wrong, you will find the same man going back on this a moment later.
This year, or this month, or, more likely, this very day, we have failed to practise ourselves the kind of behaviour we expect from other people.
Human beings, all over the earth, have this curious idea that they ought to behave in a certain way, and can't really get rid of it.
Safety and happiness can only come from individuals, classes, and nations being honest and fair and kind to each other.
Reality, in fact, is always something you couldn't have guessed. That's one of the reasons I believe Christianity. It's a religion you couldn't have guessed.
Badness is only spoiled goodness.
God has landed on this enemy-occupied world in human form...The perfect surrender and humiliation was undergone by Christ: perfect because He was God, surrender and humiliation because He was man.
Only the skilled can judge the skillfulness, but that is not the same as judging the value of the result.
Who can endure a doctrine which would allow only dentists to say whether our teeth were aching, only cobblers to say whether our shoes hurt us, and only governments to tell us whether we were being well governed?
Everything except God has some natural superior; everything except unformed matter has some natural inferior.
Without sin, the universe is a Solemn Game: and there is no good game without rules.
In the midst of a world of light and love, of song and feast and dance, [Lucifer] could find nothing to think of more interesting than his own prestige.
It is in their 'good' characters that novelists make, unawares, the most shocking self-revelations.
